CS101 — Lecture 5: Recursion
Date: 2026-09-25

What is recursion?
A function that calls itself is recursive. Every recursive function needs
two parts: a base case that stops the recursion, and a recursive case that
breaks the problem into a smaller version of itself. Without a base case,
the function calls itself forever and the program crashes with a stack
overflow (RecursionError in Python).

Example: factorial
def factorial(n):
    if n == 0:          # base case
        return 1
    return n * factorial(n - 1)   # recursive case

Each call waits on the result of the next call before it can return. This
builds up a "call stack" — factorial(4) calls factorial(3), which calls
factorial(2), and so on down to factorial(0), then the results multiply
back up on the way out.

Example: Fibonacci and why naive recursion can be slow
def fib(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return n
    return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2)

This works but recomputes the same values many times — fib(5) calls fib(3)
twice, fib(2) three times, etc. This is a preview of why we'll care about
Big-O later in the course: naive recursive fib is O(2^n), which gets slow
fast. One fix (not required for this course, but worth knowing) is
memoization — caching results you've already computed so you never redo
the same subproblem. We are not covering memoization in this course.

Recursion vs. iteration
Anything you can write recursively you can also write with a loop, and vice
versa. Recursion tends to read more naturally for problems that are already
defined in terms of smaller versions of themselves (tree traversal, nested
data structures). Loops tend to be more memory-efficient since they don't
build up a call stack.

Common mistakes
- Forgetting the base case (infinite recursion).
- Base case that's never actually reached because the recursive case
  doesn't move toward it (e.g. calling factorial(n) instead of
  factorial(n - 1)).
- Off-by-one base cases (using n == 1 as the base case for factorial
  instead of n == 0 still works, but only because factorial(1) is
  defined as 1 too — worth being deliberate about which base case you pick).

Practice problem discussed in class
Write a recursive function that reverses a string. Base case: an empty
string or single character reverses to itself. Recursive case: take the
first character off, recursively reverse the rest, and append the first
character to the end.
